Add the AI observability play to 'How to pitch self-driving' (#19199)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/handbook/growth/sales/how-to-pitch-self-driving.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **[Signal sources](/docs/self-driving/inbox/sources)** | Built-in pipelines that watch **one data stream continuously**, in real time. Error Tracking, Support, Session Replay, Replay Vision, Product Analytics, and AI Observability in PostHog, plus external tools connected through the [data warehouse](/docs/data-warehouse) – GitHub Issues, GitHub CI, Zendesk, Linear, and pganalyze. You toggle them on. |
```

- make tool capitalization consistent 
- I don't think logs is a native signal source? It says so in the docs but it's not in the settings
- Health check is a Scout thing afaik? It's listed as a native signal source in settings and docs but I think that's kind of misleading? it makes it seem like there is a PostHog tool called Health Check.
- The docs say external tools via data warehouse, but in Inbox setup only these are available (GitHub Issues, GitHub CI, Zendesk, Linear, and pganalyze)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **[Scouts](/docs/self-driving/scouts)** | Research agents that **explore a slice of your data** on a schedule, and decide what's worth surfacing. A few standard scout templates are ready to use, and you can generate custom scouts specific to your project. |
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this.
Completeness reads as plain tracking to me, which is the tool itself. A potential value point of the signals pipeline is triaging high volume of a specific thing. E.g. I have a lot of errors (specific problem) --> PRs (specific fix).
Scouts are more loosey goosey. I like the brand mentions scout as an example. We have a lot of brand mentions, but it's not a specific problem, therefore it needs more room to explore your data to suggest what to fix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Have them open the PostHog Web inbox.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In PostHog Web, open the scouts page and pick the **"Make a scout"** suggestion. It scans their actual project and proposes custom scouts grounded in their real data – which is itself the moment, because the suggestions are specific to them.
```

Reviewer: Will this happen quickly enough during a call?

Reviewer: Maybe I've missed a pricing update (but I think scouts are still free)
It's the actual generated PR that is billed, so technically if scout is quiet, they got research for free (I think?).

| **[Reports](/docs/self-driving/reports) and the [inbox](/docs/self-driving/inbox)** | A grouped set of signals becomes a **report** in your inbox, available in the [web app](/docs/self-driving/web), [PostHog Desktop](/docs/posthog-desktop), and Slack. This is the surface a human actually looks at. |
| **[Research](/docs/self-driving/inbox/research) and [PRs](/docs/self-driving/anatomy-of-a-pr)** | From a report, a research agent connects it to the codebase and marks it **actionable** when a code fix is possible. From there an implementation agent can open a PR. Nothing merges without a human. |

The full flow: **something watches (source or scout) → it emits signals → the pipeline groups them into a report → the inbox researches it → an agent can open a PR.** The docs walk the same chain in order, so [the self-improving loop](/docs/self-driving/self-improving-loop) is the page to send anyone who wants the whole thing end to end.

> ### Scouts vs Signals

Reviewer: This heading doesn't really match the two points (which are valid but kind of random).
I suggest putting them in the section below.

> - **A scout is not an alert.** An alert fires on a threshold you set on one metric. A scout has memory, learns your baseline, dedupes against what it already told you, weighs how much a finding matters, and stays quiet on a quiet day. If a customer describes something a simple alert would solve, sell them the alert – it's cheaper and they'll trust us more for saying so.

Reviewer: Scouts themselves are free atm (billing is for PRs) so technically it's not a cost comparison. But I'm not sure when that will change.
Also, an alert is basically paying to be notified of a problem.
Ideally paying for PRs generated by a scout is paying to be notified that of a solution.

In a hurry before a call? Skip to the [cheat sheet](#cheat-sheet).

## What you're selling

The pitch is simple: If you can define these five in one line each, you can handle almost any question on the call. Self-driving is currently in open beta, so be sure to communicate that as well.

> | Part | One-line definition |

Reviewer: these definitions aren't one-liners, but that's semantics.

| **[Research](/docs/self-driving/inbox/research) and [PRs](/docs/self-driving/anatomy-of-a-pr)** | From a report, a research agent connects it to the codebase and marks it **actionable** when a code fix is possible. From there an implementation agent can open a PR. Nothing merges without a human. |

The full flow: **something watches (source or scout) → it emits signals → the pipeline groups them into a report → the inbox researches it → an agent can open a PR.** The docs walk the same chain in order, so [the self-improving loop](/docs/self-driving/self-improving-loop) is the page to send anyone who wants the whole thing end to end.

### Scouts vs Signals

- **A scout is not an alert.** An alert fires on a threshold you set on one metric. A scout has memory, learns your baseline, dedupes against what it already told you, weighs how much a finding matters, and stays quiet on a quiet day. If a customer describes something a simple alert would solve, sell them the alert – it's cheaper and they'll trust us more for saying so.

> - **Not every report becomes a PR.** The PR is the flashiest end state, not the only one. Plenty of the value is a report that tells a human something true they'd have missed. We also don't want to overpromise anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Not every report becomes a PR.** The PR is the flashiest end state, but there's plenty of value in a report that flags something you might have missed, and has real research to back it up. We also don't want to overpromise anything.
```

## Scouts and signal sources: the strengths of each

Both feed the same inbox, and most customers will likely end up running both. 

> A signal source will report on every single item. Turn on error tracking as a source and *every* qualifying error-tracking signal gets processed, continuously, in real time. That predictability is useful when you want something predictable and comprehensive: you can reason about coverage, you get the same behavior today and next month.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A signal source will ingest every single item. Turn on Error Tracking as a source and *every* qualifying error gets processed continuously. That specificity is useful when you want something comprehensive, and predictable.
```

> A scout trades some of that determinism for judgement and customization. It runs on a schedule rather than continuously, it explores rather than following a fixed stream, and it decides matches criteria on its own – which means it can weigh, rank, cluster, and stay quiet, but also means it's making a call each run and won't be exhaustive by design. That's the right trade when the volume is unmanageable, the interesting thing spans several surfaces, or "worth knowing" is a matter of opinion that only the customer can define.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A scout trades some of that determinism for flexibility and customization. It runs on a schedule rather than continuously, and explores rather than following a fixed stream. Like a signal source, a scout weighs, ranks, and clusters data points, the key difference is that each scout retains memory of its previous runs, and can make a judgement call whether new findings are "worth knowing" (sometimes a run will return nothing). 
```

| **Tuning** | Configuration | Steerable in plain English, and it learns |
| **Best when** | Missing something is unacceptable | Everything is technically "something" and you need a filter |

> - **Scout notes.** Short steering messages in plain English that every run reads: "the staging traffic spike you keep flagging is known noise, stop reporting it," or "we shipped a new checkout Tuesday, treat conversion shifts after that as expected." They can address one scout or the whole fleet, and can be given an expiry so time-boxed steering retires itself. Notes are advisory – they direct attention without lowering the evidence bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Scout notes.** Short steering messages in plain English that every run reads: "the staging traffic spike you keep flagging is known noise, stop reporting it," or "we shipped a new checkout Monday, treat conversion shifts after that as expected." They can address one scout or the whole fleet, and can be given an expiry so time-boxed steering retires itself. Notes are advisory – they direct attention without lowering the evidence bar.
```

- Claude absolutely loves tuesdays for some reason. Smells like LLM to the reader
- we use the term "fleet" in the docs so nothing to change here, but flagging to @andrewm4894 that we should be consistent in the product (it's called a troop there)

> - **Inbox feedback becomes steering.** When someone dismisses or snoozes a report and types why, that note is forwarded into the steering channel and later runs read it. Triaging your inbox honestly is how scouts get quieter, with nobody editing anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Inbox feedback becomes steering.** When a team member dismisses or snoozes a report and types why, that note is forwarded into the steering channel and later scout runs read it. Triaging your inbox is how scouts get smarter.
```

> - **Durable memory.** Each run reads back what earlier runs learned – what's normal, what it already surfaced, what it decided to hold – so it dedupes against itself and sharpens over time rather than starting cold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Durable memory.** Each run reads back what earlier runs learned (what's normal, what it already surfaced, what it decided to hold) so it dedupes against itself and sharpens over time rather than starting cold.
```
small nit but the en/em dash trio is very sus. parenthesis makes it less sus

- **A custom scout suggests its own edits.** When a run turns up concrete evidence that its own instructions misdirected it, it files that as a suggestion with the evidence attached. The scout proposes, the customer decides.
- **Dry runs.** Run it for real, record everything it would have filed, write nothing to the inbox. The answer for a cautious or high-stakes team.

> So the framing for a customer with strong opinions about their own domain: a source gives you guaranteed handling of a known stream; a scout lets you encode judgement nobody else could write down, then keep tuning it in English as you learn. Customization is the reason to reach for a scout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the framing for a customer with strong opinions about their own domain: a source gives you guaranteed handling of a known stream; a scout lets you encode judgement, then keep tuning it in English as you learn. Customization is the reason to reach for a scout.
```

| Their pain is described in nouns: tickets, exceptions, issues | Their pain is described in questions: "are we losing anyone?", "did that launch land?" |
| Fastest to demo: toggle a source, show the queue fill | Fastest to demo: point a scout at their data and run it on demand |

> > **An example.** A customer asks for a Linear source, expecting every issue to become a PR. That's exactly what the source does, and for a team whose backlog is already groomed – where every issue in there genuinely should be worked – it's the right answer, and the determinism is the point. In some cases, what they want is a Linear _scout_ reading the same issues with weighting and judgement they control and can steer over time. Same data, two legitimate products. The question that separates them: "should everything in there get worked, or does someone need to decide what matters first?" Both are valid, but giving them that flexibility and choice is key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **An example.** A customer hooks up Linear as a signal source, and every issue automatically turns into a PR. No judgment calls needed – if it's there, it gets worked on. That's great for a team whose backlog is already clean and prioritized. In some cases, what they actually want is a Linear _scout_ reading the same issues with weighting they can control and judgement they can steer over time. Same data, two use cases. The question that separates them: "should everything in there get worked, or does someone need to decide what matters first?"
```

## The core pitch

Keep it simple. Something like this:

> > PostHog already has all the behavioral data about how people use your product. We turn that data into signals, feed those signals to an agent running in a sandbox, and it automatically opens PRs that improve your product. The more you put into PostHog, the better the signals get.

Reviewer: Nice!

> - Have them get PostHog Desktop downloaded and their GitHub and PostHog connected, so they can kick off a PR live.

Reviewer: I'd leave Desktop out of this for now. It's still behind a waitlist, and you don't need it to ship PRs with the Inbox. The Github auth is in web (and they can also use the slack app)

> - Frame the cost honestly: offer to credit any usage on errors and replays during the demo window, since you need them on to show it at its best, and they can turn them back off after. If it wows them, they'll want to keep them on anyway, and that's the flywheel starting.

Reviewer: Pricing is still per PR ($15) – not sure if you also want to credit that since they'll probably consume the free tier one they turn on signal source (3 free PRs per month). I defer to you folks on how best to run this.

> Because they're looking at their own product the whole time, the conclusion lands on its own, which is exactly the same dynamic that makes the core pitch work.

Reviewer: I am very curious if people will be cool with screensharing this, since it'll potentially expose some general shittiness in their product.

## What a scout actually looks like

Specific and specialized scout explanations tailored to use-case are always better than generic overviews and broad scout examples.

> PostHog ships around 30 **canonical scouts** out of the box – error tracking, product analytics, revenue analytics, experiments, feature flags, web vitals, session replay, data warehouse health, and more – each watching a common pattern (default toggled on or off per project). The full list with what each one looks for is in [scout examples](/docs/self-driving/scout-examples). Worth knowing: every canonical scout is just a readable markdown skill in our public repo, which is a good answer to "what is it actually doing?" from a skeptical engineer.

Reviewer: This page is a LOT about scouts. I wonder if we can condense some of the sections above since it goes back and forth between being how to pitch it vs straight up docs/how it works

Author: yeah, agreed. there's already a good skeleton on the basics published already anyway, so i'm happy to do another full pass on consolidation and brevity so we are just referencing docs instead of re-creating them.

## What a scout actually looks like

Specific and specialized scout explanations tailored to use-case are always better than generic overviews and broad scout examples.

> PostHog ships around 30 **canonical scouts** out of the box – error tracking, product analytics, revenue analytics, experiments, feature flags, web vitals, session replay, data warehouse health, and more – each watching a common pattern, each toggled on or off per project. The full list with what each one looks for is in [scout examples](/docs/self-driving/scout-examples). Worth knowing: every canonical scout is just a readable markdown skill in our public repo, which is a good answer to "what is it actually doing?" from a skeptical engineer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostHog ships around 30 **canonical scouts** out of the box – error tracking, product analytics, revenue analytics, experiments, feature flags, web vitals, session replay, data warehouse health, and more – each watching a common pattern (default toggled on or off per project). The full list with what each one looks for is in [scout examples](/docs/self-driving/scout-examples). Worth knowing: every canonical scout is just a readable markdown skill in our public repo, which is a good answer to "what is it actually doing?" from a skeptical engineer.
```

> - A scout that checks whether a merged fix actually held, re-measured after a soak window.

Reviewer: what is a soak window?

Author: AI slop language that crept in from a different PR. i thought i had edited all those out. good catch

- Scouts that read a repo: docs drifting out of date, features shipped with no instrumentation, flags fully rolled out whose keys still litter the codebase.

> Also worth knowing: scout can watch things that never throw an exception, which is kind of like a reverse-signal. No news is good news!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also worth knowing: scouts can watch things that never throw an exception, which is kind of like a reverse-signal. No news is good news!
```

For ideas that work across verticals, and the [scout patterns cookbook](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/blob/master/products/signals/skills/authoring-scouts/references/scout-patterns.md) behind them, send them to [scout examples](/docs/self-driving/scout-examples). For a deep dive with two real scouts traced end to end and a walkthrough video, [What is a scout?](/blog/what-is-a-scout) are good references.

## The AI observability play

AI products are an easy self-driving pitch: they already know their agent misbehaves, and nobody is reading every trace. Two signal types turn [AI observability](/docs/ai-observability/start-here) data into inbox reports.

**Evaluations (rolled out to everyone).** [Ingest AIO events](/docs/ai-observability/start-here) → create an [online evaluation](/docs/ai-evals) that scores them → turn on [evaluation reports](/docs/ai-evals#evaluation-reports), where an agent reads a batch of results and writes up what it found. That summary is the signal.

> **Anomaly detection (alpha).** Ingest AIO events → add an [anomaly detection alert](/docs/alerts#anomaly-detection) on an AI errors, latency, or cost insight → enable agent investigation. The agent checks whether the anomaly is real and writes a notebook. Only true positives reach the inbox. 

Reviewer: @Radu-Raicea why a notebook? Does it not generate a report like the other signal sources?

Reviewer 2: An anomaly detection alert with the option that has an agent investigate the anomaly generates a notebook with its full investigation. That agent is not part of self-driving, it's part of the Alerts feature. That agent does, however, generate a summary of that notebook, and emits a signal with it (which ends up as a report).

Reviewer: ah, that makes sense. Thank you!

> **Anomaly detection (alpha).** Ingest AIO events → add an [anomaly detection alert](/docs/alerts#anomaly-detection) on an AI errors, latency, or cost insight → enable agent investigation. The agent checks whether the anomaly is real and writes a notebook. Only true positives reach the inbox. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Anomaly detection (alpha).** Ingest AI observability events, then add an [anomaly detection alert](/docs/alerts#anomaly-detection) on an AI errors, latency, or cost insight and turn on agent investigation. When the alert fires, the agent checks whether the anomaly is real and writes up what it found in a notebook. Only true positives reach the inbox, as a report summarizing the investigation.
```

Things not to promise: that it replaces anyone, that it catches everything, that reports always become PRs, or that it's finished. It's in open beta, it's improving fast, and saying so builds more credibility than pretending otherwise.

## Cheat sheet

For the five minutes before a call.

- **The chain:** something watches (source or scout) → signals → grouped into a report → inbox researches it → agent opens a PR → human merges.
- **Source = one stream, continuous, exhaustive, predictable. Scout = scheduled, exploratory, selective, steerable.** Both land in the same inbox, and most customers want both.
- **The trade-offs between Signals and Scouts:** sources give determinism and guaranteed coverage, scouts give judgement and steerability. Neither is the upgrade.

> - **Lead with sources** when missing one is unacceptable. **Lead with scouts** when everything is technically "something" and they need a filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Lead with sources** when there's significant volume to triage. **Lead with scouts** when everything is technically "something" and they need a filter.
```

- **Best discovery question:** "What does someone on your team open every morning?"
- **The question that separates the two:** "Should everything in that stream get worked, or does someone need to decide what matters first?"
- **Best demo move:** toggle a source and watch the queue fill, or make a scout on their data and run it on demand, live.
- **Best close:** one concrete thing pointed at one thing they care about.
- **On an AI account:** eval + [evaluation report](/docs/ai-evals#evaluation-reports) ships today, anomaly detection + agent investigation is alpha. Both need [AIO events](/docs/ai-observability/start-here) flowing first.
- **Never promise:** auto-merge, total coverage from a scout, or a PR from every report.

> - **Links to share:** [What is a scout?](/blog/what-is-a-scout), [scout examples](/docs/self-driving/scout-examples), [self-driving docs](/docs/self-driving).

Reviewer: this blog post explains the pipeline https://posthog.com/blog/what-if-your-product-built-itself
